Access control models have traditionally included mandatory access control (or lattice-based
access control) and discretionary access control. Subsequently, role-based access control has
been introduced, along with claims that its mechanisms are general enough to simulate the
traditional methods. In this paper we provide systematic constructions for various common
forms of both of the traditional access control paradigms using the role-based access control
(RBAC) models of Sandhu et al., commonly called RBAC96. We see that all of the features of
the RBAC96 model are required, and that although for the mandatory access control
simulation, only one administrative role needs to be assumed, for the discretionary access
control simulations, a complex set of administrative roles is required.

Role-based access control (RBAC) has recently received considerable attention as a promising alternative to traditional discretionary and mandatory
access controls (see, for example, Proceedings of the ACM Workshop on
Role-Based Access Control, 1995-2000). In RBAC, permissions are associated with roles, and users are made members of appropriate roles thereby
acquiring the roles’ permissions. This greatly simplifies management of
permissions. Roles can be created for the various job functions in an
organization and users then assigned roles based on their responsibilities
and qualifications. Users can be easily reassigned from one role to another.
Roles can be granted new permissions as new applications and systems are
incorporated, and permissions can be revoked from roles as needed.
An important characteristic of RBAC is that by itself it is policy neutral.
RBAC is a means for articulating policy rather than embodying a particular security policy (such as one-directional information flow in a lattice).
The policy enforced in a particular system is the net result of the precise
configuration and interactions of various RBAC components as directed by
the system owner. Moreover, the access control policy can evolve incrementally over the system life cycle, and in large systems it is almost certain to
do so. The ability to modify policy to meet the changing needs of an
organization is an important benefit of RBAC.
Traditional access control models include mandatory access control
(MAC), which we shall call lattice-based access control (LBAC) here [Denning 1976; Sandhu 1993], and discretionary access control (DAC) [Lampson
1971; Sandhu and Samarati 1994; 1997]. Since the introduction of RBAC,
several authors have discussed the relationship between RBAC and these
traditional models [Sandhu 1996; Sandhu and Munawer 1998; Munawer
2000; Nyanchama and Osborn 1994; 1996]. The claim that RBAC is more
general than all of these traditional models has often been made. The
purpose of this paper is to show how RBAC can be configured to enforce
these traditional models.
Classic LBAC models are specifically constructed to incorporate the
policy of one-directional information flow in a lattice. This one-directional
information flow can be applied for confidentiality, integrity, confidentiality and integrity together, or for aggregation policies such as Chinese Walls
[Sandhu 1993]. There is nonetheless strong similarity between the concept
of a security label and a role. In particular, the same user cleared to, for
example, Secret, can on different occasions login to a system at Secret and
Unclassified levels. In a sense the user determines what role (Secret or
Unclassified) should be activated in a particular session.